README.md, before:

# Supercast
A Supervisor plugin to dynamically push all process details and state changes to a centralised service.
This allows a single application to monitor and control a huge number of processes across hundreds or thousands of hosts.

## Usage

Place the supercast.py file somewhere on the supervisor daemon's PYTHONPATH.

Also add the websocket-client module and make it available.

```
    pip install websocket-client
```

Then add the following to the supervisor.conf (only the first 3 lines are required - the others optional)
```
[rpcinterface:supercast]
supervisor.rpcinterface_factory = supercast.make_supercast
urls=ws://frontend1.company.com:12345/supervisor-updates,ws://frontend1.company.com:12345/supervisor-updates
environment=Production
subenv=SpecialOps
clusterid=cluster1
returnproxy=proxy1.company.com:8080
logfile=supercast.log
```

You *should* also ensure that the `identifier` configured under the `[supervisord]` section in the `supervisor.conf` is 
unique across your envronment.

###### urls
A comma separated list of websocket endpoints which supercast will try to connect to and send status 
information.  It'll pick one at random and then iterate through them in a round-robin fashion whenever the connection
fails.


###### environment
Specifies the envronment of all processes running under this supervisor. 
It's simply a string sent to the server and may be used to categorise supervisors in a UI or front end.
Defaults to 'dev'

###### subEnv
Specifies a sub-environment to further categorise the processes running under this supervisor.
Defaults to an empty string.

###### clusterId
Allows you to specify the docker cluster or similar information if required by the server process.  
Defaults to an empty string.

###### returnProxy
Tells the server process about any proxy required to connect to this supervisor rpc interface.  This may be required
for supervisors running under some docker configurations.  Defaults to empty string

###### logfile
Where to put the Supercast logs.  Defaults to `supercast.log`

## How it works
### Overview
This plugin will attempt to maintain a websocket connection to one of the configured urls and regularly send json 
messages containing full details of the supervisor daemon, the host and each process.
The messages are sent on connection and repeated whenever any state changes as well as on a regular schedule.
If the connection breaks it will automatically reconnect to the next configured destination in round-robin fashion.

The server process which is listening to these messages can display the current state of all supervisors and processes 
in one place. 
Process control is achieved by connecting back to the individual supervisor xml-rpc interfaces.

### Suggested server implementation details
Our reference server implementation (not open source currently) has a number of identical redundant processes 
connected by a shared memory grid. 
This allows updates to be received by any server process and the data shared with all others in the cluster.

Normally the server will be able to detect disconnections and mark that particular host as 'lost' unless a shutdown 
status update was received. 
When the supervisor re-connects to the cluster it is marked as running again.  Data for supervisors that don't connect 
for a long time can be deleted unless they are expected to be normally present.

If a management server node is shutdown then typically all supervisors will reconnect to other nodes within a few seconds
and users will not notice. 
To allow for stuck or dead supervisor data to be cleaned up the supercast plugin re-sends all state at least every hour.
The servers timestamp each update when received and will purge any data that has not been updated for longer than this.


### Websocket Messages

Messages from supercast to the websocket server consist of a single json object with 4 possible members.

There are currently no messages sent from the server to the supervisor over the websocket connection.  All control and 
log tailing is done via the xml-rpc interface.

#### supervisor
This is the first message sent immediately after connection. It's also sent whenever there are any changes and at
least once per hour.  

example message:
```
{"supervisor": 
  {
    "supervisorid": "londondev1.company.com", 
    "updateTime": 1538650345269.77, 
    "since": 1534949285260.078, 
    "motd": "welcome to londondev1 ...", 
    "supervisorpid": 7444, 
    "subEnv": "", 
    "statename": "RUNNING", 
    "state": 1, 
    "host": "londondev1", 
    "fqdn": "londondev1.company.com"
    "rpcport": 9009, 
    "supervisorversion": "3.3.1", 
    "arch": "x86_64", 
    "env": "dev", 
    "osversion": "#1 SMP ...", 
    "os": "Linux-2.6.xx ...", 
    "processor": "x86_64", 
    "clusterId": "",
    "dockerId": "",
    "returnProxy": "",
    "configadded": [], 
    "configupdated": [], 
    "configremoved": [],
    "configError": null
  }
}
```

#### process
This message is sent once for each process after connection following the supervisor message, when there are changes 
and at least once per hour.

example message:
```
{"process": 
  {
    "updateTime": 1538650029151.118, 
    "startsecs": 30, 
    "uid": 2000455, 
    "pid": 11213, 
    "stopsignal": 15, 
    "exitstatus": 0, 
    "childpids": "", 
    "group": "myscripts", 
    "since": 1538650027990.5442, 
    "start": 1538650027990.5442, 
    "state": 20, 
    "env": "dev", 
    "username": "appuser", 
    "autostart": true, 
    "stderr_logfile": null, 
    "stop": 1538650026988.152, 
    "host": "londondev1", 
    "spawnerr": "", 
    "exitcodes": "[0, 2]", 
    "supervisorid": "londondev1.company.com", 
    "name": "myscript", 
    "subEnv": "", 
    "statename": "RUNNING", 
    "command": "/usr/bin/python myscript.py", 
    "startretries": 3, 
    "stopwaitsecs": 60, 
    "directory": "/usr/local/myscript", 
    "stdout_logfile": "/logs/myscript.log",
    "environmentVars": {"key": "value"}
  }
}
```

The supervisorid, host, env and subEnv of the process will match the supervisor message.  Having different values of these
parameters on processes running under the same supervisor daemon is not currently supported - they are only repeated
in the process message for convenience.



#### updateComplete
This message is sent once following the supervisor message and the complete set of process messages after connection.
It indicates to the server that the complete set of information has now been sent over the current connection.  
The server should then clean-up any old process details received via a previous connection that have not been re-sent.
e.g. processes that were removed from supervisor while it was disconnected from the server.

```
{"updateComplete": true }
```


#### deleteGroup
This is sent whenever a group is deleted from the supervisor daemon.

```
{"deleteGroup": "myscripts" }
```

Note that individual processes are never deleted from supervisord.  
To load changes to a process config the entire group is stopped, deleted and re-added.



## Future Directions

* Most of the recent changes have been to add more information about the host and processes.  
It is likely that this trend will continue.
* We should add some packaging so that it can be more easily distributed and installed via pip.
* Some way to send commands to the supervisor via the websocket connection would be very useful.  This would avoid the xml-rpc interface 
and issues with proxies across network domains and into docker clusters.  
For clustered servers this will probably involve forwarding commands across the cluster
to reach the connected node. Streaming log updates may need an alternative route.
* Code tidy up - This code has been in production for years. It has worked very reliably and is believed to be free of any serious bugs.  However it does not conform to any established python style and there is much that could be improved.
* The automated checking for config changes could be made more efficient
* We have a huge list of improvements we'd like to make to supervisord itself - but unfortunately very little time.
The most useful would be to trigger starting->running state transitions based on the process log output.



## History

Created and maintained by Mike Gould at Tudor https://www.tudor.com/ from 2016 to present.

First made public under the open source GPLv3 Licence in January 2019


## Licence
Published under the GPL v3 licence - see the COPYING file for the licence text.

Commit message:

add pod parameter, enable exitWithProcess, enable signalling stopped processes by default

README.md, after:

# Supercast
A Supervisor plugin to dynamically push all process details and state changes to a centralised service.
This allows a single application to monitor and control a huge number of processes across hundreds or thousands of hosts.

## Usage

Place the supercast.py file somewhere on the supervisor daemon's PYTHONPATH.

Also add the websocket-client module and make it available.

```
    pip install websocket-client
```

Then add the following to the supervisor.conf (only the first 3 lines are required - the others optional)
```
[rpcinterface:supercast]
supervisor.rpcinterface_factory = supercast.make_supercast
urls=ws://frontend1.company.com:12345/supervisor-updates,ws://frontend1.company.com:12345/supervisor-updates
environment=Production
subenv=SpecialOps
clusterid=cluster1
pod=frontend-pod1
returnproxy=proxy1.company.com:8080
exitwithprocess=False
logfile=supercast.log
```

You *should* also ensure that the `identifier` configured under the `[supervisord]` section in the `supervisor.conf` is 
unique across your envronment.

###### urls
A comma separated list of websocket endpoints which supercast will try to connect to and send status 
information.  It'll pick one at random and then iterate through them in a round-robin fashion whenever the connection
fails.


###### environment
Specifies the envronment of all processes running under this supervisor. 
It's simply a string sent to the server and may be used to categorise supervisors in a UI or front end.
Defaults to 'dev'

###### subEnv
Specifies a sub-environment to further categorise the processes running under this supervisor.
Defaults to an empty string.

###### clusterId
Allows you to specify the docker cluster or similar information if required by the server process.  
Defaults to an empty string.

###### pod
Allows you to specify the kubenetes pod or similar information if required by the server process.  
Defaults to an empty string.

###### returnProxy
Tells the server process about any proxy required to connect to this supervisor rpc interface.  This may be required
for supervisors running under some docker configurations.  Defaults to empty string

###### exitwithprocess
Forces the supervisor daemon to exit when any contained process exits.
This is useful when supervisor is used only to report status from a containerised process.  Defaults to False

###### logfile
Where to put the Supercast logs.  Defaults to `supercast.log`

## How it works
### Overview
This plugin will attempt to maintain a websocket connection to one of the configured urls and regularly send json 
messages containing full details of the supervisor daemon, the host and each process.
The messages are sent on connection and repeated whenever any state changes as well as on a regular schedule.
If the connection breaks it will automatically reconnect to the next configured destination in round-robin fashion.

The server process which is listening to these messages can display the current state of all supervisors and processes 
in one place. 
Process control is achieved by connecting back to the individual supervisor xml-rpc interfaces.

### Suggested server implementation details
Our reference server implementation (not open source currently) has a number of identical redundant processes 
connected by a shared memory grid. 
This allows updates to be received by any server process and the data shared with all others in the cluster.

Normally the server will be able to detect disconnections and mark that particular host as 'lost' unless a shutdown 
status update was received. 
When the supervisor re-connects to the cluster it is marked as running again.  Data for supervisors that don't connect 
for a long time can be deleted unless they are expected to be normally present.

If a management server node is shutdown then typically all supervisors will reconnect to other nodes within a few seconds
and users will not notice. 
To allow for stuck or dead supervisor data to be cleaned up the supercast plugin re-sends all state at least every hour.
The servers timestamp each update when received and will purge any data that has not been updated for longer than this.


### Websocket Messages

Messages from supercast to the websocket server consist of a single json object with 4 possible members.

There are currently no messages sent from the server to the supervisor over the websocket connection.  All control and 
log tailing is done via the xml-rpc interface.

#### supervisor
This is the first message sent immediately after connection. It's also sent whenever there are any changes and at
least once per hour.  

example message:
```
{"supervisor": 
  {
    "supervisorid": "londondev1.company.com", 
    "updateTime": 1538650345269.77, 
    "since": 1534949285260.078, 
    "motd": "welcome to londondev1 ...", 
    "supervisorpid": 7444, 
    "subEnv": "", 
    "statename": "RUNNING", 
    "state": 1, 
    "host": "londondev1", 
    "fqdn": "londondev1.company.com"
    "rpcport": 9009, 
    "supervisorversion": "3.3.1", 
    "arch": "x86_64", 
    "env": "dev", 
    "osversion": "#1 SMP ...", 
    "os": "Linux-2.6.xx ...", 
    "processor": "x86_64", 
    "clusterId": "",
    "pod": "",
    "dockerId": "",
    "returnProxy": "",
    "configadded": [], 
    "configupdated": [], 
    "configremoved": [],
    "configError": null
  }
}
```

#### process
This message is sent once for each process after connection following the supervisor message, when there are changes 
and at least once per hour.

example message:
```
{"process": 
  {
    "updateTime": 1538650029151.118, 
    "startsecs": 30, 
    "uid": 2000455, 
    "pid": 11213, 
    "stopsignal": 15, 
    "exitstatus": 0, 
    "childpids": "", 
    "group": "myscripts", 
    "since": 1538650027990.5442, 
    "start": 1538650027990.5442, 
    "state": 20, 
    "env": "dev", 
    "username": "appuser", 
    "autostart": true, 
    "stderr_logfile": null, 
    "stop": 1538650026988.152, 
    "host": "londondev1", 
    "spawnerr": "", 
    "exitcodes": "[0, 2]", 
    "supervisorid": "londondev1.company.com", 
    "name": "myscript", 
    "subEnv": "", 
    "statename": "RUNNING", 
    "command": "/usr/bin/python myscript.py", 
    "startretries": 3, 
    "stopwaitsecs": 60, 
    "directory": "/usr/local/myscript", 
    "stdout_logfile": "/logs/myscript.log",
    "environmentVars": {"key": "value"}
  }
}
```

The supervisorid, host, env and subEnv of the process will match the supervisor message.  Having different values of these
parameters on processes running under the same supervisor daemon is not currently supported - they are only repeated
in the process message for convenience.



#### updateComplete
This message is sent once following the supervisor message and the complete set of process messages after connection.
It indicates to the server that the complete set of information has now been sent over the current connection.  
The server should then clean-up any old process details received via a previous connection that have not been re-sent.
e.g. processes that were removed from supervisor while it was disconnected from the server.

```
{"updateComplete": true }
```


#### deleteGroup
This is sent whenever a group is deleted from the supervisor daemon.

```
{"deleteGroup": "myscripts" }
```

Note that individual processes are never deleted from supervisord.  
To load changes to a process config the entire group is stopped, deleted and re-added.



## Future Directions

* Most of the recent changes have been to add more information about the host and processes.  
It is likely that this trend will continue.
* We should add some packaging so that it can be more easily distributed and installed via pip.
* Some way to send commands to the supervisor via the websocket connection would be very useful.  This would avoid the xml-rpc interface 
and issues with proxies across network domains and into docker clusters.  
For clustered servers this will probably involve forwarding commands across the cluster
to reach the connected node. Streaming log updates may need an alternative route.
* Code tidy up - This code has been in production for years. It has worked very reliably and is believed to be free of any serious bugs.  However it does not conform to any established python style and there is much that could be improved.
* The automated checking for config changes could be made more efficient
* We have a huge list of improvements we'd like to make to supervisord itself - but unfortunately very little time.
The most useful would be to trigger starting->running state transitions based on the process log output.



## History

Created and maintained by Mike Gould at Tudor https://www.tudor.com/ from 2016 to present.

First made public under the open source GPLv3 Licence in January 2019


## Licence
Published under the GPL v3 licence - see the COPYING file for the licence text.
